All right guys, welcome back.
In the last video, we talked about communicating during
the getting hired process and the actual process on Upwork of accepting an offer,
starting the contract, and ending the contract.
In this video, we're going to talk about what
happens when you're on contract with a client.
You've already negotiated the price,
you've already figured out what it is,
and you've accepted the offer.
Now, how do you manage the client relationship while you're performing the work so
that the client is happy and it works smoothly for both you and the client.
One of the principles I live by, I call over-communicating.
The reason why I call it that is it because it's a reminder to
make sure that you're communicating as much as possible.
You don't want to be obnoxious with this obviously,
don't be crazy and communicate unnecessarily.
But anytime there's an update to share with the client,
anytime there's a thought you had,
don't be afraid to share.
One of the things that you're communicating in a nonverbal way
while sending multiple messages or contacting the client,
is that they can trust you and that you're always there in case they need you.
One of the tactics I've used with clients is to summarize
the list of things they want because often clients are just sending random stuff to you.
Oh I want this, I want this, I want this.
What I like to do, summarize everything that they've
said to me in the message stream of what they want or in another document,
put it through, here is a checklist of what you want me to do.
Then after that, go through and like I've done here,
provide a summary of all the things I've done,
checking them off and that communicates to the client, Oh, Okay.
I know we're at now.
I know how much he's done.
The one thing you don't want to do when you're working with
clients on Upwork is get the job,
do the work and don't communicate with them at all.
You might think, okay. I'm doing a great job.
I'm not bothering them. But you want to let
them know how it's going throughout the process.
Be responsive when they message you.
Make sure to tell the client as soon as you've done something,
give them regular updates.
Obviously, you'll get a feel for the client's expectations over time.
Some are quite needy and want daily or constant communication,
others are happy with communication more spread out.
But if you haven't heard from the client in a while,
make sure to follow up.
If you've done something new or need something else to go on with,
It's on you to communicate as much as possible with the client
and let them know that you're there and that you're actually working on their project.
Again, remember here, I want to reiterate this,
once you're on contract with a client,
they have the ability to leave a review on your profile and that
can be very detrimental if they give you a bad review.
You want to make sure if you're on contract with a client,
you not only do great work,
but communicate well with them and make
sure that if there's any issues whatsoever that they have,
that they can bring it up with you and that you'll sort it out.
That's a lot better than letting issues just sit around and then they
won't communicate how they feel and suddenly you'll be getting a two,
three star review at the end when you could have gotten a five-star review.
What you need, especially when starting out, is five-star reviews.
You want to make sure that every review you get on artwork is five-stars.
Don't leave it up to chance,
make sure that you're communicating constantly with the client,
making sure that they're happy.
One of the areas that I really like to communicate as well is around budget.
A lot of clients on Upwork are budget conscious.
If they ask you to do something that you think is
going to take a long time and you're on an hourly contract,
you don't want it to get to the point where,
you do this 10 hour task and then it gets charged to them and they're like, "What?
I didn't realize it was going to take that long."
Even though you're in the right to do the work that they asked you,
you want to communicate to them, "Okay.
That's going to be time-consuming.
It's going to take me around this many hours.
As long as you're cool with that,
otherwise, here are some other alternatives."
You want to make sure that you're respecting their budget
and you're not going to charge them more than they expect.
Even if you've done the work and you're entitled to it,
you want to know up front that the client is going to be happy with you doing that.
One of the things I do when I'm communicating with
clients is if they asked me to do something that's going to be very time consuming,
I let them know that that's going to be time-consuming,
here's a more cost effective way to do it.
Clients often will really appreciate it.
If they say, "Look, that's cool,
I want you to still do it."
That's fine, you've done all you can.
But that's a little extra step that I like to take when communicating with clients.
Also during this process,
you want to keep in mind that this could be a repeat customer
and you could actually build a long-term relationship with them.
If that's the case, I would recommend getting on the phone with them every now and then,
maybe meeting up with them if they are in the same city as you.
Try and build a relationship with them because
clients like to come back to the same freelancers again and again.
It's hard to find good people.
As a business owner,
I've outsourced once before and it was a terrible experience.
The freelancer just couldn't figure out even a basic task.
This is the environment that clients are working with.
That's where trust and relationship become so important to you and the client.
You want to make sure that if
you trying to build a long-term relationship with these clients,
which you ideally should be,
that you communicate with them in as many ways.
That's going to communicate, trust,
familiarity, and build a relationship with them.
Get them on the phone,
meet them in person if you can,
and build the relationship that way.
Again, we talked about this in the last video,
but I want to reiterate it again.
One, don't be a yes man.
Two, consult if you can, and three,
if you don't know the answer,
admit it, but offer a solution.
Again, with the yes man thing,
if it's a question that is really simple to answer and doesn't need any more information,
yes, of course you can say yes.
I'm not saying you can't say yes to anything.
But if it's a bit of a loaded question with a lot of considerations,
don't just say yes, but say, yes,
we can do that or we can do it this way or I don't know about that.
This is the opportunity where you get into being a consultant.
You can say, "Yes,
I can do that, but how about this?"
Or have you considered this?
Again, clients will really appreciate this.
The final point is,
if you don't know the solution, admit it,
but be proactive in coming up with a solution.
Say for instance, if they say,
can you do this, don't just say no.
You want to be honest with them saying,
look, I've never done that before.
I'd be happy to learn it.
Here's what I can do.
You can say no for sure,
but don't just leave it there.
Say, here's what we can do next.
I don't want to harp on about those points too much.
We covered a bit of that in the last video,
but that's essentially it guys.
After you've done a great job,
you've done all those things,
you've communicated thoroughly throughout the project,
the client is happy,
then you can end the contract.
You want to make sure that before you end the contract,
that the client is as happy as possible.
If you have to put in an extra few bits of work just to make the client happy, do it.
Because it means so much to your profile to have
a five-star review rather than a three-star review with a few words of,
oh, it wasn't a good experience working with this freelancer.
Make sure that you end on a high point.
Usually the job is completed,
they're happy, they enjoyed working with you.
That's a good point to end the contract and then you get that sought after review.
It feels great. You got to five-stars on your profile.
You're looking good, you're on your way to a 100 percent jobs success score,
and top rated status.
Actually one of the things when you're getting started on platform,
if you starting to build some momentum,
Upwork will give you a badge as well called rising talent,
I think they call it at the moment.
These are the things that incentivize you to do great things for your clients.
It's going to make your profile look much better.
Make sure that if the client is not happy,
try and fix that up as much as possible before you actually
end that contract and start to exchange those reviews.
That's basically the whole Upwork process from setting up your profile,
to finding work, to submitting proposals,
to managing the client relationship,
and then ending that contract.
This is pretty much the bulk of the course completed.
The next two videos are going to be
bonus lessons that I mentioned at the start of the course,
and that is my tactic that has really supercharged my results.
I'm excited to share that one with you very soon.
But first of all,
let's talk about the job success score.
I'll see you in the next video.